 
ARCH10004 DESIGN HISTORY &THEORY IN THE MAKING  
 
ASSESSMENT 1: WEEKLY RESPONSE TO READINGS & LECTURES  
FORMAT:  200 word written response, submitted online 
DUE DATE:  Tuesdays at 10:00 am from Week 2 to Week 12 [except Week 7] 
WEIGHT:  50% of total marks for the subject. (10 weekly responses x 5 marks) 
 
This assessment evaluates your ability to link the lectures with the readings. You will be asked to identify a key argument in the weekly reading and find connections between the reading(s) and the weekly lectures.  
 
You will develop skills in: 
- analysing historical and contemporary 
texts 
- identifying key arguments and evidence used to support the argument 

- identifying key points from a lecture  

- making connections between various sources 
on a particular topic 
 
 
ASSIGNMENT INSTRUCTIONS 
 
[1] Lectures:  
You are expected to attend the weekly lectures in-person. Focus on key ideas highlighted by the lecturer. Consider how the lectures relate to the readings. 
 
[2] Reading comprehension and critical thinking: 
Read the Required Reading. This is for your written response. 
The Recommended Reading is linked to your tutorial and assignments. 
You are advised to read both.• 
 
[3] Find connections between the readings and the lecture content.  
 
(4) Reading Response for Required Reading 
 
You are asked to address the same 2 questions every week: 
 
Question 1: Identify one key argument that runs through this text. 
Support this with direct reference to the text and briefly explain the argument’s relevance. What evidence or examples does the author use to support the argument? 
Do not summarize the text. Focus on what the author is trying to say to the audience in this one key argument. (2 marks) 
 
Question 2: Can you 
including in-person and background lecture] to the reading? What new knowledge 
have you learned in the lecture that is not in the readings? (2 marks) 
 
• NOTE: Every week on Canvas we have assigned specific questions to frame your readings. These questions highlight key terms and topics. They are prompts for the tutorial conversation and will assist you in understanding the topic. They are not your weekly reading response questions. 


 
Length 
200 words (equivalent to 6-7 sentences or 2 sentences per question). Note, you can be 10% over or 10% under on word count for assignments (180-220 words). If you are below 180 words, 10% will be deducted from your mark. 
 
Format 
At the top of the response list the reading you have read using the full reference. Cut and paste this information from the course outline or from the Canvas page. (1 mark) 
 
 
Sample Response 1 
 
Week 1 
“An Aboriginal History of Yarra”  
 
1. The ‘History of Yarra’ reading describes the impact of Batman and the other settlers. Europeans made laws so that it was illegal for Indigenous People to enter Melbourne. They were worried and scared. The article uses a lot of historical records and images. It discusses unpleasant impacts of European settlement like disease, dispossession and violence and how land sales pushed out Aboriginal people. It ends by stating that despite all of this the Wurundjeri community has survived.  

2. The lecture discusses the present day consequences of settlement in Melbourne. It discusses terms like ‘Sovereignty’, ‘Treaty’ and dispossession in relation to property explaining different ideas of land ownership of settlers and Indigenous people. The background lecture is by Janet McGaw and Gary Murray who has multi-clan ancestry. They discuss why having a treaty is important. Land and treaty are important and connected ideas in both reading and lectures.  

1.  


Word Count: 148 words. 
Mark: 2.0 (Originally 3.0 but marks deducted for lower word count) 
 
Under word count (10% deducted), incomplete citation of sources but a pass grade because it demonstrates that two readings have been read, the questions are answered and some of the material in the readings has been noted and understood. Responses are generalised and not analytic but has evidently followed the lecture. 
 
 
Sample Response 2 
 
Week 1 
Yarra City Council in partnership with Wurundjeri Tribe Land Compensation & Cultural Heritage Council, “An Aboriginal History of Yarra”, Agora, vol.48, no.4, (2013): 1-8. https://aboriginalhistoryofyarra.com.au/Agora_vol_48_no_4_2013.pdf 
 
3. “An Aboriginal History of Yarra” describes and analyses 
the relationships between the Wurundjeri-willam traditional owners and the settlers during the first years of Melbourne’s European foundation. It draws on 
from the period and primary documents to describe the tumultuous transformation of Country; 
a Country formed by the creator spirit Bunjil. The text states that ‘land ownership’ was the driving force for many settlers. The authorship of this text by the Wurundjeri council connects these issues to land rights. 


4. The lecture situates these ideas in relation to the challenges of design teaching in a settler colonial urban environment drawing from ideas discussed by Janet McGaw and Gary Murray in Making Space for Justice. They speak of displacement and dispossession and the lack of a treaty.  The lecture discusses land ownership more broadly in relation to European ideas of property, and Indigenous ideas of caring for Country but also introduces ideas of Indigenous sovereignty and joint sovereignty. Whereas the reading discusses the historical injustices that caused Indigenous people to lose their rights to their Country, 
the lecture discusses what this means to Indigenous people today and asks us to reflect on why a political resolution is being sought.   


 
Note. Academic essays usually state their argument in the first couple of paragraphs or in the Abstract if they have one. The author of this sample response has looked at the footnotes to see the range of sources for evidence and tried to specify them. You could also just list the kinds of events and practices described in the reading. The author has also added some details to show that I had read the material: the name of the 
traditional owner group, the name of the creator spirit Bunjil, interviewees in the background lecture, as well as using the term Country rather than land, to signify an Indigenous perspective. 
 
Word Count: 210 words Mark: 4.5   
 
Feedback 
 
Students will receive more detailed feedback for submissions from Weeks 2 to 6, thereafter minimal feedback will be provided. 
 
Mark Allocation 
 
Correct citation of reading material at top of page -1 mark 
Question 1 – 2 marks 
Question 2 – 2 marks 
 
Marking Rubric: 
 
Reading comprehension 
 o Is this an 








 2 
 

Linking lecture content 
 o Has the student linked the readings with the content of both lectures [in-person and background]? 


 2 
 
Writing skills/citation 
       Correct citation of the reading 
      Clear written expression, correct grammar and  spelling 
 1 
 


80% - 100% H1 
 75-79% H2A 
 70-75% H2B 
 65-69% H3 
 50-64% P 
 0-49% N 
 

Identifies a key argument and communicates the relevance of this in a sophisticated manner . 
Demonstrates convincingly how this is supported by evidence/examples.  
 
Has mentioned authors, or aspects of the topic to demonstrate close reading, listening and in-person attendance.  
 Identifies a key argument and communicates the relevance of this clearly. Sound summary of reading content. 
 
Demonstrates convincingly how this is supported by evidence/examples.  
 
Has mentioned authors, or aspects of the topic to demonstrate close reading, listening and in-person attendance. 

 Identifies a key argument correctly     
 
Cites evidence / examples that are used to support the argument.  
 
Identifies new information from the lecture. Explains why this stood out, 
and how it is linked to the readings.  
 
 Identifies argument. Might be a summary rather than analytical response or overuse quotations to explain an author’s argument. 
 
Comprehensive but may not address some key ideas.  
 Identifies argument but its relevance is poorly communicated Incomplete explanation of why the new information stood out, how it is linked to the readings, or was viewed  as important. 
 Might not state a key argument or cite evidence / examples that are significant.poor comprehension of topic.  
 
Able to link readings to lecture and background lecture and  identify new materials abd ideas in a perceptive way. 
 
 Able to link readings to lecture 
and background lecture and identify new materials and ideas.  

 Able to link reading to lecture and background lecture and identify new materials. 
 Summary of Lectures with some effort at linking them to reading. May not be as confident in identifying new ideas.  
 May not be as confident in linking reading to lectures. 
 Links are poorly made or inadequate. Does not seem to have followed lectures or understood them. 
 
Reading is cited correctly.Is well written without grammatical errors. 
 Reading is cited   correctly.Is well written without grammatical errors. 
 Reading is cited   correctly. Writing is straightforward and clear.  
 . Cites reading. Writing is fair.  
 Cites reading . Writing is fair -  may have grammatical errors.  
 Cites reading imperfectly.Writing needs improvement.  
 


 
General criteria considered in assessment of all questions: 
• Composition of text and level of written expression. 

• Capacity to summarise and analyse reading content, including sources. 
The degree to which the response is analytical rather than descriptive. 


• Capacity to discern authorial positions, arguments, potential biases, and methodologies. 


• Whether all question requirements have been met. 


N.B. As noted above, 10% will be deducted if your submission is 10% below or over the prescribed word count. (Note that quotes are not included in word counts).
 

