MARKING RUBRIC


Assessment 3: Share House [1000 Word Equivalent]


Historical Research
	* Has the student described the building type, locality, and aesthetic in historical terms?
* Is it properly referenced and are there references
to the readings?
	6
	Understanding the Context
	* Has the student understood the house’s relationship to the urban context through access and amenities?
* Has the student understood the social divisions that gentrification has introduced?
* Has the student identified Indigenous landmarks in the neighbourhood?


	6
	Adaptive reuse
	Has the student successfully addressed steps needed for adapting the building for:
* Student accommodation
* Disability
* Migrant Small Business
* COVID
	6
	Analysis
	* Has the student analysed the challenges and possibilities of adapting the house for student accommodation?
* Can you hear the student’s voice?
	5
	Writing Skills and Illustrations
	Grammar, syntax, spelling, images [plan, photos etc.]
	2
	



80% - 100% H1
	75-79% H2A
	70-75% H2B
	65-69% H3
	50-64% P
	0-49% N
	Historical Research – An evocative description with a keen understanding of the historical context, building type and aesthetic attributes showing research and referencing outside the subject. Able to situate the building in the physical and social developments discussed. Introduces new
ideas.
	A clear and comprehensive description of the historical context building type and aesthetic attributes citing subject resources and situating the building in the physical and social development as discussed.
	A descriptive summary of the historical context and building type and aesthetic attributes citing the subject’s resources, and others. An interpretive understanding of the development of the
suburb.
	A summary of the historical context and building type and aesthetic attributes citing the subject’s resources. An understanding of the development of the suburb.
	A descriptive summary of the historical context and building type with some omissions, but sufficient to create a historical narrative of the suburb’s development.
	Inadequate summary of the historical context, building type, or suburban context.
	Context: Astute observation of the surrounding environment and access to amenities presented with a critical and analytical view to the transformations of the suburb over time as discussed in the subject; and documentation and interpretation of internal changes in a creative way.
	A comprehensive overview of urban amenities and circulation with an interpretive and analytical understanding of the changes and how they impact the built environment. Documentation and interpretation of internal changes in an effective way.
	A descriptive overview of urban amenities and circulation with an interpretive understanding of the surrounding context and practical attention to amenities and circulation.
Documentation and interpretation of internal changes.
	A descriptive summary with interpretation of the surrounding context and practical attention to amenities and circulation.
Documentation and interpretation of internal changes. .
	A summary with some omissions, but adequate to communicate the key amenities and circulation patterns, and internal changes needed. Lacking in interpretation.
	A poor summary of the surrounding context, amenities and internal changes.
	Adaptive reuse: A reflective but also critical exploration of adaptive reuse mindful of the challenges posed by social integration and segregation. All steps are
considered.
	A critical and interpretive exploration of adaptive reuse with careful consideration of the challenges and responses in the several steps.
	A descriptive and interpretive overview of the steps taken in adaptive reuse.
Some reflection on the process.
	A descriptive summary of the steps with some interpretation. All steps must be included.
	A summary of the steps with some interpretation. Some steps maybe incomplete but all have to be attempted.
	An incomplete summary omitting one or more of the steps.
	Analysis: A sophisticated analysis of historical changes through the built environment lens presenting a critical evaluation of the potential for adaptive reuse and the challenges encountered in an imaginative way.
	Identifies the historical changes and analyses their relevance for informing the adaptive reuse of the building with sustained analysis and critical
interpretation of findings.
	Identifies the key changes and
relates them to the steps taken for adaptive
reuse in a discursive way.with some critical analysis and interpretation of
findings.
	Identifies the key
changes and relates them to the steps
taken for adaptive reuse with limited
.with some critical analysis and interpretation of findings.
	Does not identify sufficient changes and their relevance for adaptive reuse is poorly communicated. Does not write in an analytical or interpretive way but provides an adequate summary of the
material.
	Poor analysis or lack of understanding of the essay’s objectives. Lack of consideration of the adaptive reuse according to the steps taken.
	Writing: Well crafted and written with attention to grammar, syntax and referencing. May be creative and use simple language in a sophisticated way.
	Well written with attention to grammar, syntax and referencing.
	Well written with attention to grammar, syntax and referencing. Few errors.
	A straightforward style of communication. Over or under referencing. Some grammatical errors.
	Uneven writing skills, lack of references, or incorrect referencing. Over dependence on websites.
	Poor writing skills and referencing. Many errors.