ARCH10004 DESIGN HISTORY & THEORY IN THE MAKING SM2 2022  
ASSESSMENT 3: SHARE HOUSE 
DUE DATE: UPLOADED TO CANVAS BY 23:59 WEDNESDAY NOVEMBER 1st 
WEIGHT: 25% OF TOTAL MARKS FOR THE SUBJECT 
WORD COUNT: EQUIVALENT TO 1000 WORDS 
ASSIGNMENT INSTRUCTIONS  
Below are detailed instructions and suggestions to help you with the assignment task  
Individual submission – 1000-word essay narrating the development of their allocated house  
Assessment 3 focuses on the theme of housing and shelter and thinking about broader urban and landscape environments which contribute to the patterns of housing and domestic life. The assessment focuses on redeveloping four terrace houses located in the suburb of Fitzroy for student accommodation and adapting it according to COVID restrictions.  
List of sites  
 
1. 39 Palmer Street, Fitzroy

 
2. 53 George Street, Fitzroy

 
3. 194 Moor Street, Fitzroy

 
4. 276 Napier Street, Fitzroy

 
5. 283 Fitzroy Street, Fitzroy 


In week 8 students will select their share house allocations and they will be grouped according to house choices. Each group will include a mix of Australian and International students, and a gender mix. Students will be provided a brochure of their house and a collaged map of Fitzroy showing the context of all four houses.  
Students will build a narrative around the potential changes and redevelopment options 
for their houses for student accommodation, following a series of steps covered between weeks 9-12. The final submission is an essay 
which documents all the changes 
to their house through these steps. These steps are outlined below. Students have the option of using the topics of each step as a subheading in their essay if it provides more clarity.  
5 Steps  
Sub 
 
 Housing Plots and  
 Social Networks 
 Health and  
 Adaptive Reuse 
 


 
1. SUBURBS: INDIGENOUS FITZROY 
In week 9, students will attend a site visit to Gertrude Street Fitzroy. In your group, locate your assigned share house and identify your home in its context.  
 
• Amenities in its vicinity checking for goods and services 
as well as transportation nodes 
on google maps. 

 
• Observe the various businesses and services available 
to residents. 


 
• Observe the surrounding environment: 
the width of the street, the orientation of the building, accessibility, the back lane, parking, nearest park or open area determining the quality of light and ventilation in your building. 

• Identify important landmarks including Indigenous examples from the App and Map. 


2. HOUSING, PLOTS AND NEIGHBOURHOOD AMENITIES 
In week 10, students will divide into their groups and map how they will use the space within the share-house and the spaces in the surrounding neighbourhood.  
 
IN THE NEIGHBOURHOOD 
 
• Look at Kevin Lynch’s iconic hand-drawn 1959 map as devices for mapping the elements in the city. MIT Libraries, Dome, Lynch, Kevin. 1959. MC 208, Box 6, Field Analysis Whole City. https://dome.mit.edu/handle/1721.3/36507 

• Draw the share-house in the context of the neighbourhood. 
Consider key amenities such as communal shared zones, parks, transport stops, public school, shops, post office, public pools, and other emotional and phenomenal qualities that are harder to map, such as fear and safety.  o Identify important landmarks including Indigenous examples from the App and Map.  

o Draw the paths and your route through the neighbourhood to various amenities that you would need during the week. Consider paths you travel the most?  

o Zoom out to the scale of Melbourne. How will you get to the university?  

o Draw the outline of your share-house (you can just use your notebook and pen or digital device). 

o Identify key architectural and spatial qualities 
of your share house (age, style, key features, typology etc.)  

o Discuss how you will occupy it among the group. Divide the internal spaces to accommodate students in your group.  

o Study accessibility and appropriateness for re-zoning as student housing.  

o Consider the following prompts: . Where is your bedroom?  

. Do you need to modify the interior? 

. Discuss access and accessibility. 

. One of you has a sports injury – How would you modify the house for a person with a disability?    








 
INSIDE THE HOUSE 
• Revise the plan of your house to represent its refurbishment.  

• Note its redevelopment to meet the disability code. Refer to the NDIS Design Standards for accessibility. Look at Kevin Lynch’s maps and identify disability standards and access for people with disabilities. 


MIT Libraries, Dome, Lynch, Kevin. 1959. MC 208, Box 6, Field Analysis Whole City. https://dome.mit.edu/handle/1721.3/36507 
NDIS Code: https://www.ndis.gov.au/media/1868/download?attachment 
 
 
 
 
3. SOCIAL NETWORKS: ADAPTATION TO MIGRANT COMMUNITIES  
In week 11, groups will conduct research on the Fitzroy suburb and adapt the house for renting 
to a small immigrant business that serves the African-Australian diasporic community in the Atherton Gardens Estate.  
RESEARCH 
 
• Refer to historical maps of Fitzroy 
(see general sources) to understand the development of the suburb. Identify sites of significance 
to your share the house 

• Look at the following sources:  o Fitzroy History Society’s Atherton Walk: https://fitzroyhistorysociety.org.au/atherton-walk/  

o ACMI: Fiona Hillary, Atherton Street Memorial to Melbourne Slums: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HEnc8oQpEKw 

o Black Diaspora Naarm: https://www.cultureascreative.com/black-diasporas-naarm-melbourne 




• Consider the transformation of Fitzroy through so called ‘slum clearance’ and urban renewal.  

• Analyse the transformation of Fitzroy through gentrification and address the social polarization reflected in physical land use and property boundaries.

 
• Discuss humanitarian migrants and the experience of the African Diaspora at Atherton Gardens Estate. How can we reconcile the different social perceptions of these two types of housing high-and low rise?  


 
REDEVELOPING FOR AN IMMIGRANT BUSINESS
 
• Consider how you will rent the room to the small immigrant business 

 
• Consider the type and requirements of the business

 
• Describe how the house will be modified to accommodate the business: 
• Reallocating spaces of the house to accommodate the loss of residential area

 
• Consider how other outdoor spaces can be utilised 

 
• Consider main access points to business and parking facilities

 
• Consider separate pathways, entry/exit points or spaces for staff/employees 

 
• Consider key utilities required for the business such as heating/cooling, electricity, water, lighting and furniture 





4. HEALTH AND QUARANTINE 
In week 12, groups will adapt their home according to Covid quarantine restrictions.  
 
• Study the prepared map of Fitzroy showing your share house. 

 
• Assume students are quarantined for four weeks and can only move within a 1 km radius 
of your house. The radius is indicated in light blue circles for each house on the map. 

 
• Discuss the different ways in which quarantine affects spaces 

 
• Consider how lockdown will impact your daily and weekly routines, 
like studying, shopping or exercise? 

 
• How has the pandemic affected home space? 

 
• What amenities can or can’t be reached? 

 
• What activities are no longer possible? 

 
• What adjustments are needed?  


 
5. ADAPTIVE REUSE OF A FITZROY TERRACE DWELLING FOR STUDENT HOUSING: ESSAY  [25%]


 
The final individual submission will be in form of an essay consisting of 1000 words. The Council has selected your share house for demolition. The university wants to buy it for student accommodation. The essay needs to evaluate the building’s potential for adaptive reuse by describing your share house experience. Your essay and those of others will be added to a report on the feasibility [or not] of retaining the house.  
 
You must not identify your share house fellow tenants by name. They need to be identified as tenant A, Tenant B, Tenant C etc.  
 
 
Essay Title: Adaptive Reuse of a Fitzroy Terrace Dwelling for Student Housing 
House Address: 
Your name and number. 
 
Tenants: [For example]  
Tenant A: A first year architecture student from Malaysia who practices violin 
Tenant B: An Australian student from the Gold Coast who plays soccer and owns a bicycle 
Tenant C: A second year landscape architecture student from Melbourne 
 
Description of the House: When describing the house make sure to articulate its historical significance and key architectural and aesthetic characteristics or features. Tell us how it is placed on the site, its orientation, accessibility and internal layout. Use footnote references to the subject readings and others you might find. This section needs to be descriptive and interpretive.  
 
Sharing the House: The essay must describe your experience of sharing the house, noting the advantages and disadvantages and covering the previous four steps. This section needs to be both critical and interpretive. It must reach a conclusion on whether this house has the potential to be repurposed for student accommodation based on your shared experience. You can visit each step in the order that you studied it in class. Among the key issues you need to address are the proximity to Indigenous heritage landmarks and other notable spaces, the layout and adaptability of the interior spaces including for disability, the available neighbourhood amenities, the potential to rent a space for a migrant small business and how you adjusted to living in the house during quarantine. Use your own photographs and sketches to illustrate.  
 
Case for Adaptive Reuse: Tell us your conclusions about the adaptability of this dwelling. 
You writing needs to be analytical and critical – so you can best represent the conditions in the house, and its adaptability. We expect that you would write in the third-person in presenting your case to the university, but, you can choose to write the essay in a creative way, as a first person narrative—as long as you address the above points.  
 
Descriptive: To describe the house in an evocative way so we can visualise the space and the architecture. 
Interpretive: To tell us how you want us to understand this house – often using adjectives that convey qualitative features or help us understand its potential. 
Critical: To guide us in understanding the pros and cons – advantages and disadvantages. 
Analytical: To present your observations in ways that will help us form opinions on the house.  
 
 
WORD LIMIT 
You can go over or under the word limit by 10 per cent. The footnotes won't be included in the word count.  
IMAGES 
You are encouraged to include up to 5 images but only those taken/created by you [not off the web or subject materials] – including photographs and sketches of the building. These can be hand drawn.  
Drawing annotations are included in the word count. Example of illustrations below.  
 
 

 
 
 

 
SUBMMISSION INFORMATION AND DATES 
The final individual submission must be uploaded on CANVAS by 23:59 Wednesday, November 1st .  
 
RESEARCH AND REFERENCING 
It is important for all your University submissions that you reference your work. This informs the reader where you got your key facts, information, and ideas from as well as the extent and range of your research. 
For this subject we use the Chicago A Footnote referencing system. Make sure that you include exact page numbers in your footnotes. These indicate precisely where you found your information.   
You can find out more about referencing here: https://library.unimelb.edu.au/ recite/referencingstyles/chicago-a 
ABP Study and Research Guide: https://unimelb.libguides.com/abp  
REFERENCING EXAMPLES 
Books  
Footnote example 
2. Author, Title of Book (Place of publication: Publisher, year), page number(s).  
Bibliography example 
Author (surname, given name). Title of Book. Place of publication: Publisher, year. 
 
Journal Articles  
Footnote example 
11. Author, “Title of article,” Title of Journal volume number, issue number (year): page number(s), DOI/URL/Database name.  
Bibliography example 
Author (surname, given name). “Title of article.” Title of Journal volume number, issue number (year): page numbers of article. DOI/URL/Database name.  
 
Website 
Footnote example 
26. Author of content, "Title/description of page," Title/description of Website, Date (of publication, modification or access), URL.  
Bibliography example 
Author (surname, first name). "Title/description of page." Title/description of Website. Date (of publication, modification or access). URL. 
 
 
 
OTHER INFORMATION & ADVICE 
All work will be scanned by plagiarism detection software. Cases where Turnitin provides a high match report will be subject to the Faculty's academic misconduct processes. Be aware that the scanning database will include all work already submitted in the subject and any high matches to other student work will be treated as potential plagiarism.  
  
MARKING RUBRIC  
Assessment 3: Share House [1000 Word Equivalent] 
Historical Research 
 o




 6 
 

Understanding the Context 
 o Has the student understood the house’s relationship to the urban context through access and amenities? 

o Has the student understood the social divisions that gentrification has introduced? 

o Has the student identified Indigenous landmarks in the neighbourhood?  


 6 
 
Adaptive reuse 
 Has the student successfully addressed steps needed for adapting the building for: 
 
o Student accommodation 

o Disability 

o Migrant Small Business 

o COVID


 6 
 
Analysis 
  
o Has the student analysed the challenges and possibilities of adapting the house for student accommodation? 

o Can you hear the student’s voice?


 5 
 
Writing Skills and Illustrations 
 Grammar, syntax, spelling, images [plan, photos etc.] 
 2 
 


 
 
 
 
 
80% - 100% H1 
 75-79% H2A 
 70-75% H2B 
 65-69% H3 
 50-64% P 
 0-49% N 
 

Historical Research – An evocative description with a keen understanding of the historical context, building type and aesthetic attributes showing research and referencing outside the subject. Able to situate the building in the physical and social developments discussed. Introduces new ideas. 
  A clear and comprehensive description of the historical context building type and aesthetic attributes citing subject resources and situating the building in the physical and social development s discussed.  
 A descriptive summary of the historical context and building type and aesthetic attributes citing the subject’s resources, and others. An interpretive understanding of the development of the suburb. 
 A summary of the historical context and building type and aesthetic attributes citing the subject’s resources. An understanding of the development of the suburb. 
 A descriptive summary of the historical context and building type with some omissions, but sufficient to create a historical narrative of the suburb’s development. 
 Inadequate summary of the historical context, building type, or suburban context. 
 
Context: Astute observation of the surrounding environment and access to amenities presented with a critical and analytical view to the transformations of the suburb over time as discussed in the subject; and documentation and interpretation of internal changes in a creative way. 
  A comprehensive overview of    urban amenities and circulation with an interpretive and analytical understanding of the changes and how they impact the built environment. Documentation and interpretation of internal changes in an effective way.  
 A descriptive overview of    urban amenities and circulation with an interpretive understanding of the surrounding context and practical attention to amenities and circulation. Documentation and interpretation of internal changes.  
 A descriptive summary with interpretation of the surrounding context and practical attention to amenities and circulation. Documentation and interpretation of internal changes. .  
 A summary with some omissions, but adequate to communicate the key amenities and circulation patterns, and internal changes needed. Lacking in interpretation. 
 A poor summary of the surrounding context, amenities and internal changes.  
 
Adaptive reuse: A reflective but also critical exploration of adaptive reuse mindful of the challenges posed by social integration and segregation. All steps are considered.  
 A critical and interpretive exploration of adaptive reuse with careful consideration of the challenges and responses in the several steps.  
 A descriptive and interpretive overview of the steps taken in adaptive reuse. Some reflection on the process.  
 A descriptive summary of the steps with some interpretation. All steps must be included. 
 A summary of the steps with some interpretation. Some steps maybe incomplete but all have to be attempted. 
 An incomplete  summary omitting one or more of the  steps.  
 
Analysis: A sophisticated analysis of historical changes through the built environment lens presenting a critical evaluation of the potential for adaptive reuse and the challenges encountered in an imaginative way.   
 
 Identifies the historical changes and analyses their relevance for informing the adaptive reuse of the building with sustained analysis and critical interpretation of findings.  
 Identifies the key changes and relates them to the steps taken for adaptive reuse in a discursive way.with some critical analysis and interpretation of findings.   
 Identifies the key changes and relates them to the steps taken for adaptive reuse with limited .with some critical analysis and interpretation of findings.   
 Does not identify sufficient changes and their  relevance for adaptive reuse is poorly communicated. Does not write in an analytical or interpretive way but provides an adequate summary of the material. 
 Poor analysis or lack of understanding of the essay’s objectives. Lack of consideration of the adaptive reuse according to the steps taken. 
  
 
Writing: Well crafted and written with attention to grammar, syntax and referencing. May be creative and use simple language in a sophisticated way. 
 Well written with attention to grammar, syntax and referencing.  
 Well written with attention to grammar, syntax and referencing. Few errors.  
 A straightforward style of communication. Over or under referencing. Some grammatical errors.  
 Uneven writing skills, lack of references, or incorrect referencing. Over dependence on websites. 
 Poor writing skills and referencing. Many errors. 
 


 

