
WHAT IF? WHAT NEXT?

SPECULATIONS 
ON HISTORY’S 
FUTURES

SESSION 3A 
COUNTERING THE CANON/S
Living Cultures: Recovering Indigenous Narratives in Architectural History

TO CITE THIS PAPER | Janet McGaw, Alasdair Vance, Aunty Margaret Gardiner, Uncle Gary Murray, Aunty Esther Kirby, Sue-Anne Hunter, Moira Rayner, Selena White and Sharon Mongta. “(Not) Royal Park: Recovering the Enduring Importance of a Kulin Nations Gathering Place for Culture, Health, Wellbeing and Healing.” In Proceedings of the Society of Architectural Historians Australia and New Zealand: 37, What If? What Next? Speculations on History’s Futures, edited by Kate Hislop and Hannah Lewi, 419-426. Perth: SAHANZ, 2021. Accepted for publication December 11, 2020.

PROCEEDINGS OF THE SOCIETY OF ARCHITECTURAL HISTORIANS AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND (SAHANZ) VOLUME 37 
Convened by The University of Western Australia School of Design, Perth, 18-25 November, 2020 
Edited by Kate Hislop and Hannah Lewi
Published in Perth, Western Australia, by SAHANZ, 2021
ISBN: 978-0-646-83725-3
Copyright of this volume belongs to SAHANZ; authors retain the copyright of the content of their individual papers. All efforts have been undertaken to ensure the authors have secured appropriate permissions to reproduce the images illustrating individual contributions. Interested parties may contact the editors.

(NOT) ROYAL PARK: RECOVERING THE ENDURING IMPORTANCE OF A KULIN NATIONS GATHERING PLACE FOR CULTURE, HEALTH, WELLBEING AND HEALING

Janet McGaw | University of Melbourne
Alasdair Vance | University of Melbourne
Aunty Margaret Gardiner | University of Melbourne
Uncle Gary Murray | University of Melbourne
Aunty Esther Kirby | University of Melbourne
Sue-Anne Hunter | University of Melbourne
Moira Rayner | University of Melbourne
Selena White | University of Melbourne 
Sharon Mongta | University of Melbourne

Royal Park, Parkville, an area of windswept and open parkland just north of central Melbourne, has a long and complex history that has been well documented in historical studies and cultural heritage reports. Set aside early in the colony after La Trobe and his council petitioned for an area of 2560 acres to be reserved for “public advantage and recreation” and named in honour of the distant English monarch, it was quickly whittled down to 700 acres after gold was discovered. Land was needed for housing, experimental agriculture, a zoo, psychiatric asylum and hospitals in the rapidly expanding colony and this empty patch of land in close proximity to the town centre seemed suitable for ready appropriation. Later, during both world wars, it was used for a military camp that was subsequently taken over for low-cost housing, which became a notorious slum, before it was reclaimed as an area for sport and open space.
Settler Australia has a long history of seeing empty land as a terra nullius, available for the pickings. But this particular patch of country has a deeper history as a Kulin Nation inter-tribal gathering site for ceremony, healing, law, trade and marriage.
Over the past three decades Royal Park has received renewed attention by post-colonial historians, artists, activists and landscape architecture through discourse, performative arts practices and design, which have explored its unique ecology and broader cultural history. But the parkland’s enduring cultural significance for Indigenous people has had little attention. The authors draw on contemporary ethnographic research with, and Indigenist research by, Aboriginal people who work and use Royal Park for healing and cultural practices to this day. They argue that history is ever-present in Aboriginal culture and Royal Park remains what it always has been: a gathering place for culture, health, wellbeing and healing.










